Super Bowl 50 was an American football game to determine the champion of the National Football League (NFL) for the 2015 season.
The American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos defeated the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Carolina Panthers 24–10 to earn their third Super Bowl title.
The game was played on February 7, 2016, at Levi's Stadium in the San Francisco Bay Area at Santa Clara, California.
As this was the 50th Super Bowl, the league emphasized the "golden anniversary" with various gold-themed initiatives, as well as temporarily suspending the tradition of naming each Super Bowl game with Roman numerals (under which the game would have been known as "Super Bowl L"), so that the logo could prominently feature the Arabic numerals 50.
The Panthers finished the regular season with a 15–1 record, and quarterback Cam Newton was named the NFL Most Valuable Player (MVP).
They defeated the Arizona Cardinals 49–15 in the NFC Championship Game and advanced to their second Super Bowl appearance since the franchise was founded in 1995.
The Broncos finished the regular season with a 12–4 record, and denied the New England Patriots a chance to defend their title from Super Bowl XLIX by defeating them 20–18 in the AFC Championship Game.
They joined the Patriots, Dallas Cowboys, and Pittsburgh Steelers as one of four teams that have made eight appearances in the Super Bowl.
The Broncos took an early lead in Super Bowl 50 and never trailed.
Newton was limited by Denver's defense, which sacked him seven times and forced him into three turnovers, including a fumble which they recovered for a touchdown.
Denver linebacker Von Miller was named Super Bowl MVP, recording five solo tackles, 2½ sacks, and two forced fumbles.
CBS broadcast Super Bowl 50 in the U.S., and charged an average of $5 million for a 30-second commercial during the game.
The Super Bowl 50 halftime show was headlined by the British rock group Coldplay with special guest performers Beyoncé and Bruno Mars, who headlined the Super Bowl XLVII and Super Bowl XLVIII halftime shows, respectively.
It was the third-most watched U.S.
In early 2012, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell stated that the league planned to make the 50th Super Bowl "spectacular" and that it would be "an important game for us as a league".
The league eventually narrowed the bids to three sites: New Orleans' Mercedes-Benz Superdome, Miami's Sun Life Stadium, and the San Francisco Bay Area's Levi's Stadium.
The league announced on October 16, 2012, that the two finalists were Sun Life Stadium and Levi's Stadium.
The South Florida/Miami area has previously hosted the event 10 times (tied for most with New Orleans), with the most recent one being Super Bowl XLIV in 2010.
The San Francisco Bay Area last hosted in 1985 (Super Bowl XIX), held at Stanford Stadium in Stanford, California, won by the home team 49ers.
The Miami bid depended on whether the stadium underwent renovations.
However, on May 3, 2013, the Florida legislature refused to approve the funding plan to pay for the renovations, dealing a significant blow to Miami's chances.
On May 21, 2013, NFL owners at their spring meetings in Boston voted and awarded the game to Levi's Stadium.
The $1.2 billion stadium opened in 2014.
It is the first Super Bowl held in the San Francisco Bay Area since Super Bowl XIX in 1985, and the first in California since Super Bowl XXXVII took place in San Diego in 2003.
For the third straight season, the number one seeds from both conferences met in the Super Bowl.
The Carolina Panthers became one of only ten teams to have completed a regular season with only one loss, and one of only six teams to have acquired a 15–1 record, while the Denver Broncos became one of four teams to have made eight appearances in the Super Bowl.
The Broncos made their second Super Bowl appearance in three years, having reached Super Bowl XLVIII, while the Panthers made their second Super Bowl appearance in franchise history, their other appearance being Super Bowl XXXVIII.
Coincidentally, both teams were coached by John Fox in their last Super Bowl appearance prior to Super Bowl 50.
Despite waiving longtime running back DeAngelo Williams and losing top wide receiver Kelvin Benjamin to a torn ACL in the preseason, the Carolina Panthers had their best regular season in franchise history, becoming the seventh team to win at least 15 regular season games since the league expanded to a 16-game schedule in 1978.
Carolina started the season 14–0, not only setting franchise records for the best start and the longest single-season winning streak, but also posting the best start to a season by an NFC team in NFL history, breaking the 13–0 record previously shared with the 2009 New Orleans Saints and the 2011 Green Bay Packers.
With their NFC-best 15–1 regular season record, the Panthers clinched home-field advantage throughout the NFC playoffs for the first time in franchise history.
Ten players were selected to the Pro Bowl (the most in franchise history) along with eight All-Pro selections.
The Panthers offense, which led the NFL in scoring (500 points), was loaded with talent, boasting six Pro Bowl selections.
Pro Bowl quarterback Cam Newton had one of his best seasons, throwing for 3,837 yards and rushing for 636, while recording a career-high and league-leading 45 total touchdowns (35 passing, 10 rushing), a career-low 10 interceptions, and a career-best quarterback rating of 99.4.
Newton's leading receivers were tight end Greg Olsen, who caught a career-high 77 passes for 1,104 yards and seven touchdowns, and wide receiver Ted Ginn, Jr., who caught 44 passes for 739 yards and 10 touchdowns; Ginn also rushed for 60 yards and returned 27 punts for 277 yards.
Other key receivers included veteran Jerricho Cotchery (39 receptions for 485 yards), rookie Devin Funchess (31 receptions for 473 yards and five touchdowns), and second-year receiver Corey Brown (31 receptions for 447 yards).
The Panthers backfield featured Pro Bowl running back Jonathan Stewart, who led the team with 989 rushing yards and six touchdowns in 13 games, along with Pro Bowl fullback Mike Tolbert, who rushed for 256 yards and caught 18 passes for another 154 yards.
Carolina's offensive line also featured two Pro Bowl selections: center Ryan Kalil and guard Trai Turner.
The Panthers defense gave up just 308 points, ranking sixth in the league, while also leading the NFL in interceptions with 24 and boasting four Pro Bowl selections.
Pro Bowl defensive tackle Kawann Short led the team in sacks with 11, while also forcing three fumbles and recovering two.
Fellow lineman Mario Addison added 6½ sacks.
The Panthers line also featured veteran defensive end Jared Allen, a 5-time pro bowler who was the NFL's active career sack leader with 136, along with defensive end Kony Ealy, who had 5 sacks in just 9 starts.
Behind them, two of the Panthers three starting linebackers were also selected to play in the Pro Bowl: Thomas Davis and Luke Kuechly.
Davis compiled 5½ sacks, four forced fumbles, and four interceptions, while Kuechly led the team in tackles (118) forced two fumbles, and intercepted four passes of his own.
Carolina's secondary featured Pro Bowl safety Kurt Coleman, who led the team with a career high seven interceptions, while also racking up 88 tackles and Pro Bowl cornerback Josh Norman, who developed into a shutdown corner during the season and had four interceptions, two of which were returned for touchdowns.
Following their loss in the divisional round of the previous season's playoffs, the Denver Broncos underwent numerous coaching changes, including a mutual parting with head coach John Fox (who had won four divisional championships in his four years as Broncos head coach), and the hiring of Gary Kubiak as the new head coach.
Under Kubiak, the Broncos planned to install a run-oriented offense with zone blocking to blend in with quarterback Peyton Manning's shotgun passing skills, but struggled with numerous changes and injuries to the offensive line, as well as Manning having his worst statistical season since his rookie year with the Indianapolis Colts in 1998, due to a plantar fasciitis injury in his heel that he had suffered since the summer, and the simple fact that Manning was getting old, as he turned 39 in the 2015 off-season.
Although the team had a 7–0 start, Manning led the NFL in interceptions.
In week 10, Manning suffered a partial tear of the plantar fasciitis in his left foot.
He set the NFL's all-time record for career passing yards in this game, but was benched after throwing four interceptions in favor of backup quarterback Brock Osweiler, who took over as the starter for most of the remainder of the regular season.
Osweiler was injured, however, leading to Manning's return during the Week 17 regular season finale, where the Broncos were losing 13–7 against the 4–11 San Diego Chargers, resulting in Manning re-claiming the starting quarterback position for the playoffs by leading the team to a key 27–20 win that enabled the team to clinch the number one overall AFC seed.
Under defensive coordinator Wade Phillips, the Broncos' defense ranked number one in total yards allowed, passing yards allowed and sacks, and like the previous three seasons, the team has continued to set numerous individual, league and franchise records.
With the defense carrying the team despite the issues with the offense, the Broncos finished the regular season with a 12–4 record and earned home-field advantage throughout the AFC playoffs.
Manning finished the year with a career-low 67.9 passer rating, throwing for 2,249 yards and nine touchdowns, with 17 interceptions.
In contrast, Osweiler threw for 1,967 yards, 10 touchdowns and six interceptions for a rating of 86.4.
Veteran receiver Demaryius Thomas led the team with 105 receptions for 1,304 yards and six touchdowns, while Emmanuel Sanders caught 76 passes for 1,135 yards and six scores, while adding another 106 yards returning punts.
Tight end Owen Daniels was also a big element of the passing game with 46 receptions for 517 yards.
Anderson was the team's leading rusher 863 yards and seven touchdowns, while also catching 25 passes for 183 yards.
Running back Ronnie Hillman also made a big impact with 720 yards, five touchdowns, 24 receptions, and a 4.7 yards per carry average.
Overall, the offense ranked 19th in scoring with 355 points and did not have any Pro Bowl selections.
The Broncos' defense ranked first in the NFL yards allowed (4,530) for the first time in franchise history, and fourth in points allowed (296).
Defensive ends Derek Wolfe and Malik Jackson each had 5½ sacks.
Pro Bowl linebacker Von Miller led the team with 11 sacks, forced four fumbles, and recovered three.
Linebacker DeMarcus Ware was selected to play in the Pro Bowl for the ninth time in his career, ranking second on the team with 7½ sacks.
Linebacker Brandon Marshall led the team in total tackles with 109, while Danny Trevathan ranked second with 102.
Cornerbacks Aqib Talib (three interceptions) and Chris Harris, Jr.
(two interceptions) were the other two Pro Bowl selections from the defense.